Add February/git-notes (#14)
paImer/notes: lessons/february/oop-notes.md

# Object Oriented Programming (OOP)

> > "OOP models the real world as things that have things that do things." 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> "OOP models the real world as things that have things and do things." 
```

> \- RG, 2019

The **three** fundamental concepts of OOP are:

- [Encapsulation](#encapsulation)
- [Inheritance](#inheritance)
- [Polymorphism](#polymorphism)

> ## Encapuslation

Reviewer: But what does it mean? Why bother?

> "Tell, don't ask"

There are four visibillity modifiers in Java, `public`, `protected`, `<default>` (no modifier), and `private`.

Their access levels are given in the table below.

|Modifier   | Class  |Package |Subclass|  World |
|-----------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
|`public`   |   Y    |    Y   |   Y    |    Y   |
|`protected`|   Y    |    Y   |   Y    |    N   |
|`<default>`|   Y    |    Y   |   N    |    N   |
|`private`  |   Y    |    N   |   N    |    N   |

> The `Car` class below is fully encapsulated. It has three private fields, and each of them has its own set of *getter and setter* methods.

Reviewer: Actually, the type of encapsulation we've got below is the sloppiest (but most common) form of encapsulation. Not a calorie was spent thinking of encapsulation here - just generate getters and setters.

```suggestion
The `Car` class below is using one common form of encapsulation. It has three private fields, and each of them has its own set of *getter and setter* methods.
```

```java
class Car {
    private String brand;
    private String colour;
    private double topSpeed;

    // Getter methods
    public String getBrand() {
        return brand;
    }

    public String getColour() {
        return colour;
    }

    public double getTopSpeed() {
        return topSpeed;
    }

    // Setter methods
    public void setBrand(String brand) {
        this.brand = brand;
    }

    public void setColour(String colour) {
        this.colour = colour;
    }

    public void setTopSpeed(double topSpeed) {
        this.topSpeed = topSpeed;
    }
}
```

```java
public class TestCar {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Car myCar = new Car();

        myCar.setBrand("Mitsubishi");
        myCar.setColour("White");
        myCar.setTopSpeed(150);

        System.out.println("Brand: " + myCar.getBrand());
        System.out.println("Colour: " + myCar.getColour());
        System.out.println("Top speed: " + myCar.getTopSpeed() + " mph");
    }
}
```

Running `TestCar` will return

```
Brand: Mitsubishi
Colour: White
Top speed: 150 mph
```

as we would have hoped!

> ## Inheritance

Reviewer: Again, why would we use it? What's the purpose?

Inheritance allows the extension of a class using the `extends` keyword.

Real life example:

All *ostriches* are *birds*, but **not** all *birds* are *ostriches*.

As much as an ostrich may wish to fly, it cant. As a result, a method pertaining to flight ability in the superclass would be innappropriate (and unfair to Mr. Ostrich).

> In this case, it would make sense to define a superclass (bird) with the features and traits *all* birds have, then from there extend to individual sub-classes where type-specific (ostrich) traits can be added.

Reviewer: A key point that you're kind of touching on here: Start by writing the subclasses without a superclass, and then extract a superclass once it gets annoying.

    public String colour = "silver";
    public double topSpeed = 200;
    public String licencePlate = "2 F4ST";
}
```

```java
// Create a car!
public class TestCar {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Mercedes myCar = new Mercedes();

        System.out.println("Vehicle type: " + myCar.vehicle);
        System.out.println("No. of wheels: " + myCar.numOfWheels + "\n");

        System.out.println("Description: A stunning " + myCar.colour + " " + myCar.brand);
        System.out.println("Top speed: " + myCar.topSpeed + " mph");
        System.out.println("Licence plate: " + myCar.licencePlate + "\n");

        myCar.drive();
        myCar.stop();
    }
}
```

`TestCar` instantiates a new `Car` object, and prints out all the information. This includes the fields and methods inherited from `Car`, and the four extra fields defined in the `Mercedes` class.

Here is the console output when `TestCar.main()` is run:

```
Vehicle type: Car
No. of wheels: 4

Description: A stunning silver Mercedes
Top speed: 200.0 mph
Licence plate: 2 F4ST

Driving along
...
...
...
Squirrel!!! Stop!!!
```

## Polymorphism

> When things look the same, but don't behave the same.

> ### Static polymorphism

Reviewer: I'm sure this qualifies theoretically, but just be aware that this isn't really what we talk about when we talk about polymorphism.

Here we can define some more methods on the `Car` class, each with the same name, `drive()`. This is an example of *method overloading*.

While these methods all share the same method name, the method behaviour is dependent on the input parameters.

```java
// Different method signature = different behaviour
class Car {
    public void drive() {
        System.out.println("The car is moving");
    }

    public void drive(int speed) {
        System.out.println("The car is travelling at " + speed + " mph.");
    }

    public void drive(String brand, int speed) {
        System.out.println("The " + brand + " is travelling at " + speed + " mph.");
    }
}
```

Below, we instantiate a new `Car` object, and call the `drive()` method three times, each with different parameters.

```java
public class TestCar {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Car myCar = new Car();
        myCar.drive();
        myCar.drive(56);
        myCar.drive("Honda", 100);
    }
}
```

Console output:

```
The car is moving
The car is travelling at 56 mph.
The Honda is travelling at 100 mph.
```

### Dynamic polymorphism

Instead of *method overloading*, here we use *method overriding*.

> With this Java feature, you are able to override the methods of a parent class from its child class.

Reviewer: Does it have to be a parent class?

Author: I think so? Please check the extra bits I added (the three rules for overriding methods)

Reviewer: You also override interface methods.

```java
class Car {

>     public void drive() {

Reviewer: Do you have to implement this method in the parent class? What's the syntax if you choose not to implement it in the parent class?

With this Java feature, you are able to override the methods of a parent class from its child class.

There are three rules overriding methods:

1. The method must have the same name as in the parent class.
1. The method must have the same parameter as in the parent class.
1. There must be an IS-A relationship (inheritance).

```java
class Car {

>     public abstract void drive() {

Reviewer: Try actually writing this -- it won't compile. This contradicts your note below:

> An abstract method is a method that is declared, but contains no implementation.
